PT + ZNE tutorial (#2601)
unitaryfund/mitiq: docs/source/examples/pt_zne.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

```{tags} cirq, zne, pt, basic
```

> # ZNE with Noise Tailoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Zero-Noise Extrapolation with Twirling
```

Twirling or Noise Tailoring? I feel like more people have heard of twirling?

> This tutorial helps us understand the cases when noise tailoring is helpful for improving the performance of 
> quantum error mitigation techniques. 
> 
> We will
> 
> - compare coherent noise to incoherent noise
> - Pauli twirl coherent noise to be incoherent
> - compare the performance of [Zero-Noise Extrapolation](../guide/zne.md) (ZNE)
> on its own and in combination with [Pauli Twirling](../guide/pt.md) (PT) when the circuit is subjected to coherent noise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial explores how noise tailoring can improve the effectiveness of quantum error mitigation techniques.
Specifically, we analyze how converting coherent noise into incoherent noise through Pauli Twirling impacts the performance of [Zero-Noise Extrapolation](TODO) (ZNE).

In this tutorial, we will:

1. Define and compare coherent and incoherent noise
2. Apply Pauli Twirling to transform coherent noise into incoherent noise
3. Compare the performance of ZNE
    1. on its own, and
    2. in combination with [Pauli Twirling](TODO)

By the end of the example, you will understand when and why noise tailoring can enhance quantum error mitigation.
```

## Coherent noise vs. Incoherent noise

> 

Reviewer: Add a quick intro before diving in to definitions here. Maybe something like "Noise on quantum devices can broadly be broken into two classes. Each has different properties that requires mitigation by different techniques ..."

> **Coherent noise** is a reversible process as long as the noisy unitary transformation is known beforehand which is not always the case. These types of noise maintain the purity of the state. But in a quantum circuit, they are easily carried across the circuit such that they scale up quadratically. Dealing with coherent noise requires a large resource overhead.  

Reviewer: > But in a quantum circuit, they are easily carried across the circuit such that they scale up quadratically.

How much work would this be to make a little more precise? "They scale up quadratically" in particular.

Author: Requires some math to show this.

Reviewer: Okay lets leave that out, but it might be good to specify what "they" are.

**Incoherent noise** is a process that entangles the quantum system with its environment i.e. this type of noise is irreversible. The system and the environment are in a mixed state. It scales linearly in the small error limit. 
The noise channel can be described using Pauli operators which makes it easy to analyze and simulate. Worst case error rate is directly proportional to the **average gate infidelity**. 

```{note}
If $\mathcal{F}$ is the fidelity defining the success of preparing an arbitrary pure state $\rho$, then
$1-\mathcal{F}$ is the **average gate infidelity**.
```

> For example, a depolarizing noise channel is a stochastic noise channel where a noiseless process is probabilistically mixed with orthogonal errors. If $\rho$ is a single qubit state, $p$ is the probabilistic error rate and $\epsilon(\rho)$ is the noise channel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a depolarizing noise channel is a stochastic noise channel where a noiseless process is probabilistically mixed with orthogonal errors. If $\rho$ is a single qubit state, $p$ is the probabilistic error rate and $\mathcal{E}(\rho)$ is the noise channel:
```

I've typically seen $\mathcal{E}$ used for the error channel. Just notation, so if you don't like it no worries, but nice to be in line with what else is out there.

```{math}
\epsilon(\rho) = (1-p) \rho + p \frac{I}{2}
```
$\frac{I}{2}$ is the maximally mixed state which can be described using Paulis. 

```{math}
\frac{I}{2} = \frac{1}{4} (\rho + X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)
```

Thus, the depolarizing channel can be redescribed using Paulis as shown below. 

```{math}
\epsilon(\rho) = (1-\frac{3p}{4}) \rho + \frac{p}{4} (X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)

```

### Pauli Transfer Matrix

> Let $\Lambda(rho)$ be a $n-$qubit noise channel where $K_i$ are the Kraus operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let $\Lambda(\rho)$ be a $n$-qubit noise channel with $K_i$ being the corresponding Kraus operators.
```

```{math}

\Lambda(\rho) = \sum_{i=1} K_i \rho {K_i}^\dagger
```

> If $P_i$ and $P_j$ are $n-$qubit Paulis, the following expression defines the entries of a Pauli Transfer Matrix (PTM). Here, 
> $i$ defines the rows while $j$ defines the columns of the PTM. All entries of the PTM are real and in the interval $[-1, 1]$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If $P_i$ and $P_j$ are $n-$qubit Paulis, the following expression defines the entries of a Pauli Transfer Matrix (PTM). All entries of the PTM are real and in the interval $[-1, 1]$.
```

```{math}
(R_{\Lambda})_{ij} = \frac{1}{2^n} \text{Tr} \{ P_i \Lambda(P_j)\}
```

> A PTM allows us to distinguish between the two types of noise. The off-diagonal terms of the PTM are due to the effect of coherent noise while the diagonal terms are due to incoherent noise. PTM of a circuit is a product of the PTM of each layer in the circuit. Due to these, it is straightforward to see how coherent noise carries across different layers in the circuit and how incoherent errors are easier to deal with in the small error limit. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A PTM allows us to distinguish between the two types of noise. The off-diagonal terms of the PTM are due to the effect of coherent noise while the diagonal terms are due to incoherent noise. To find the PTM of an entire circuit, we only need to take the product of the PTM of each layer in the circuit. Due to this, it is straightforward to see how coherent noise carries across different layers in the circuit and how incoherent errors are easier to deal with in the small error limit. 
```

> how incoherent errors are easier to deal with in the small error limit

I don't actually see why this is the case. Can you add some more detail?

> The known fault tolerant thresholds for stochastic noise are higher than coherent noise which makes the former a 'preferable' type of noise compared to the latter. If we want to not deal with coherent noise, Pauli twirling can be used to tailor coherent noise to incoherent noise. Same as the expression above, when a coherent noise channel is Pauli twirled, the noise channel can be described using Paulis after averaging over multiple Pauli twirled circuits. Refer to the [Pauli Twirling user guide](../guide/pt.md) for additional information. 

Reviewer: The thing that I'm missing here is a discussion of how many twirled circuits one needs in order to effectively do the task of converting coherent errors to incoherent.

Reviewer: Makes sense. Some comments on that would be good.

## Using Pauli Twirling in Mitiq

```{code-cell} ipython3

> # Utility functions for Pauli Twirling.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import cirq
import numpy as np
import numpy.typing as npt
from cirq.circuits import Circuit

from mitiq.pec.channels import _circuit_to_choi, choi_to_super
from mitiq.utils import matrix_to_vector, vector_to_matrix

pauli_unitary_list = [
    cirq.unitary((cirq.I)),
    cirq.unitary((cirq.X)),
    cirq.unitary((cirq.Y)),
    cirq.unitary((cirq.Z)),
]

> def _n_qubit_paulis(num_qubits: int) -> list[npt.NDArray[np.complex64]]:

Reviewer: Lets not make these functions "private" since we are showing them to the reader.

It is possible to hide code cells, thought. Do you think we should make this code cell foldable so only the interested reader takes a look?

```
Now, lets add coherent noise to the CNOT gate in each twirled circuit.
```{code-cell} ipython3

noisy_twirled_circuits = []

for circ in twirled_circuits:
    split_circuit = Circuit(circ[0], circ[1], Ry(rads=np.pi/12)(q0), Ry(rads=np.pi/12)(q1), circ[-1])
    noisy_twirled_circuits.append(split_circuit)

print("Example noisy twirled circuit", noisy_twirled_circuits[0], sep="\n")
```

The twirled PTM is averaged over each noisy twirled circuit such that the new PTM is close to that of the PTM of incoherent noise. We skip the step in this section as we require a very large number of twirled circuits to demonstrate the desired effect of averaging over multiple numpy arrays.

## Noisy ZNE

Lets define a larger circuit of CNOT, CZ and H gates. 

```{code-cell} ipython3

from cirq import LineQubit, Circuit, CZ, CNOT, H

q0, q1, q2, q3  = LineQubit.range(4)
circuit = Circuit(
    H(q0),
    CNOT.on(q0, q1),
    CZ.on(q1, q2),
    CNOT.on(q2, q3),
)

print(circuit)

```

We are going to add coherent noise to this circuit and then get the error-mitigated expectation value. For a detailed discussion on this, refer to the [ZNE user guide](../guide/zne-1-intro.md). 

> As we are using a simulator, we have to make sure the twirling gates are sandwiching the coherent noise channel in the circuit.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is confusing, and in fact was already object of confusion with that infamous UnitaryHack task. The way to describe this is simply that we define a simulator where the noise model introduces coherent noise. Look at this as a black box, it being an actual hardware or a simulator. You ask the black box to execute the circuit, and whenever the box is supposed to execute a controlled gate, it corrupts the result with noise. If we mix it with twirling, or use words like sandwiching, etc.. we confuse the reader unnecessarily.

For this, `get_noise_model` is used to add noise to CZ/CNOT gates. See [PT user guide](../guide/pt-1-intro.md) for more. 

```{code-cell} ipython3
from numpy import pi
from cirq import CircuitOperation, CXPowGate, CZPowGate, DensityMatrixSimulator
from cirq.devices.noise_model import GateSubstitutionNoiseModel

def get_noise_model(noise_level: float) -> GateSubstitutionNoiseModel:
    """Substitute each CZ and CNOT gate in the circuit
    with the gate itself followed by an Rx rotation on the output qubits.
    """
    rads = pi / 2 * noise_level
    def noisy_c_gate(op):
        if isinstance(op.gate, (CZPowGate, CXPowGate)):
            return CircuitOperation(
                Circuit(
                    op.gate.on(*op.qubits), 

>                     Ry(rads=rads).on_each(op.qubits),

Reviewer 2: you say Rx in the docstring, but apply Ry here

                ).freeze())
        return op

    return GateSubstitutionNoiseModel(noisy_c_gate)

def execute(circuit: Circuit, noise_level: float):
    """Returns Tr[ρ |0⟩⟨0|] where ρ is the state prepared by the circuit."""
    return (
        DensityMatrixSimulator(noise=get_noise_model(noise_level=noise_level))
        .simulate(circuit)
        .final_density_matrix[0, 0]
        .real
    )

# Set the intensity of the noise

> NOISE_LEVEL = 7

Reviewer 2: 7 pi/2 rotations? 🤔

## Coherent noise vs. Incoherent noise

Noise on quantum devices can broadly categorized into two types: Coherent, Incoherent. Each has different properties that can be unfavorable toward a quantum circuit in different ways.

**Coherent noise** is a reversible process as long as the noisy unitary transformation is known beforehand which is not always the case. These types of noise maintain the purity of the state. But in a quantum circuit subjected to coherent noise, the errors are easily carried across the circuit. This can be discerned through the **average gate infidelity** $r(\mathcal{E})$. When coherent errors contribute to a portion of the total error-rate, the worst case infidelity can scale as $\sqrt{r(\mathcal{E})}$ {cite}`Wallman_2014` which in turn reduces the performance of a quantum device by orders of magnitude. Thus, dealing with coherent noise requires a large resource overhead to acquire inferred knowledge of the noise unitaries which can then be used to reverse the effects.

```{note}
If $\mathcal{F}$ is the fidelity defining the success of preparing an arbitrary pure state $\rho$, then
$1-\mathcal{F}$ is the **average gate infidelity**.

> ```

Reviewer: I like that we're bringing in some mathematical results here, but I do wonder if there is some ambiguity around which fidelity these statements are in reference to. Is this a process fidelity or state fidelity? Is $\mathcal{F}$ equal to what's defined here https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/0.19/qiskit.quantum_info.average_gate_fidelity?

Author: It's the qiskit one.

Reviewer: Then I think it should read

> If $\mathcal{F}$ is the average gate fidelity ...

WDYT? Should we add references here?

**Incoherent noise** is a process that results in the quantum system entangling with its environment i.e. this type of noise is irreversible. The system and the environment end up in a mixed state. It scales linearly in the small error limit. 
The noise channel can be described using Pauli operators which makes it easy to analyze and simulate. Worst case error rate is directly proportional to the **average gate infidelity**. 

> For example, a depolarizing noise channel is a stochastic noise channel where a noiseless process is probabilistically mixed with orthogonal errors. If $\rho$ is a single qubit state, $p$ is the probabilistic error rate and $\mathcal{E}(\rho)$ is the noise channel:

Reviewer: This is a great example, but it needs a connection back to (in)coherent noise. Can you add something, maybe at the end?

Do you think we should have an example for coherent noise too?

Author: The depolarizing noise example is to show how Pauli twirling is equivalent to tailoring the noise into a depolarizing noise channel.

Reviewer: I don't quite see how this relates to pauli twirling. Can you help spell it out?

From my perspective the main idea in pauli twirling is to add gates that compile to the identity, but change the impact of noise. So when you say the depolarizing channel can be written in terms of paulis, I don't see how that is pauli twirling.

Author: > From my perspective the main idea in pauli twirling is to add gates that compile to the identity,

Uh, no. Pauli twirling's goal is to transform some noise channel into a depolarizing noise channel. The circuits average over to a mixed noise channel which is what I was trying to show.

Reviewer: > Pauli twirling's goal is to transform some noise channel into a local depolarizing noise channel.

Right, yes, good point. That's the main goal. When adding gates surrounding each CNOT, you do it in such a way so that the CNOT is still the logical operation (up to global phase). In that sense are we not adding gates that end up compiling **out** (should you compile, which, you shouldn't)?

Author: I am confused about the 'compile to identity' phrase. 

If we start out with a CNOT subjected to a coherent noise channel, after Pauli twirling it's a CNOT gate with incoherent noise.

Reviewer: > I am confused about the 'compile to identity' phrase.

Yeah that was sloppy phrasing on my part, sorry! I think we agree that the effect of pauli twirling on an ideal CNOT is the identity map (PT(ideal CNOT) = ideal CNOT).

> Pauli twirling is equivalent to a local depoalrizing channel.

Is that true in all cases? I think Pauli twirling (in the infinite samples limit) only guarantees a Pauli channel is spit out, right?

BTW thanks for going back and forth on this a few times. It's really helpful for my understanding!

Author: > I think Pauli twirling (in the infinite samples limit) only guarantees a Pauli channel is spit out, right?

Depends on the noise strength, the number of Pauli twirled circuits etc. If you look at the gif example, I ended up at a finite number of pauli twirled circuits that gave us the ideal CNOT PTM. I'll edit the lines to discuss this. 

> BTW thanks for going back and forth on this a few times. It's really helpful for my understanding!

No worries!

```{math}
\Lambda(\rho) = \sum_{i=1} K_i \rho {K_i}^\dagger
```
If $P_i$ and $P_j$ are lexicographically ordered $n$-qubit Paulis $\forall P_i, P_j \in \{I, X, Y, Z \}^{\otimes n}$, the following expression defines the entries of a Pauli Transfer Matrix (PTM). Here, 
$i$ defines the rows while $j$ defines the columns of the PTM. 

```{math}
(R_{\Lambda})_{ij} = \frac{1}{2^n} \text{Tr} \{ P_i \Lambda(P_j)\}
```

All entries of the PTM are real and in the interval $[-1, 1]$. A PTM allows us to distinguish between the two types of noise. The off-diagonal terms of the PTM are due to the effect of coherent noise while the diagonal terms are due to incoherent noise. To find the PTM of an entire circuit, we only need to take the product of the PTM of each layer in the circuit. Due to this, it is straightforward to see how coherent noise carries across different layers in the circuit and how incoherent errors are easier to deal with in the small error limit. The latter is due to only focusing on the diagonal terms of the PTM for incoherent noise such that the product of two or more diagonal matrices is also a diagonal matrix.

> The known fault tolerant thresholds for stochastic noise are higher than coherent noise which makes the former a 'preferable' type of noise compared to the latter. If we want to not deal with coherent noise, Pauli twirling can be used to tailor coherent noise to incoherent noise. Same as the expression above, when a coherent noise channel is Pauli twirled, the noise channel can be described using Paulis after averaging over multiple Pauli twirled circuits. Refer to the [Pauli Twirling user guide](../guide/pt.md) for additional information. 

Reviewer: > If we want to not deal with coherent noise, ...

To avoid dealing with coherent noise, Pauli twirling can be applied to convert coherent noise into incoherent noise.

> Same as the expression above, ...

Which expression above are you referring to?

    for i in range(len(vec_pauli)):
        superop_on_pauli_vec = np.matmul(superop, vec_pauli[i])
        superop_on_pauli_matrix_transpose = vector_to_matrix(
            superop_on_pauli_vec
        )
        superop_on_pauli_matrix = np.transpose(
            superop_on_pauli_matrix_transpose
        )

        for j in range(len(n_qubit_paulis1)):
            pauli_superop_pauli = np.matmul(
                n_qubit_paulis1[j], superop_on_pauli_matrix
            )
            ptm_matrix[j, i] = (0.5**num_qubits) * np.trace(
                pauli_superop_pauli
            )

    return ptm_matrix
```

Let us consider a simple circuit of a CNOT gate. We are going to subject this circuit to two types of noise and compare
their respective PTMs.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import numpy as np
import seaborn as sns
import matplotlib.pylab as plt

from cirq import LineQubit, Circuit, CNOT, Ry, depolarize, X, Y, Z

q0 = LineQubit(0)
q1 = LineQubit(1)

circuit = Circuit(CNOT(q0, q1))
print(circuit)
```
```{code-cell} ipython3
ptmcnot = ptm_matrix(circuit, 2)
ax = sns.heatmap(ptmcnot.real, linewidth=0.5, vmin=-1, vmax=1)

> print("Ideal CNOT PTM")

Reviewer: Can you add this as a title instead of printing it?

ax = sns.heatmap(ptmcnot.real, linewidth=0.5, vmin=-1, vmax=1)
print("Pauli Transfer Matrix of noisy CNOT (coherent)")
plt.show()
```
If we compare the PTM of the ideal CNOT gate to those when the gate was subjected to incoherent noise and coherent noise, 
there are additional sources of errors to deal with when coherent noise is acting on the CNOT gate. These can be reduced or tailored to be close to how the incoherent noise PTM appears through Pauli Twirling.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.pt import generate_pauli_twirl_variants

# Generate twirled circuits
NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 3
twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(
    circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)
print("Example ideal twirled circuit", twirled_circuits[-1], sep="\n")
```
Now, lets add coherent noise to the CNOT gate in each twirled circuit.
```{code-cell} ipython3

noisy_twirled_circuits = []

for circ in twirled_circuits:
    split_circuit = Circuit(circ[0], circ[1], Ry(rads=np.pi/12)(q0), Ry(rads=np.pi/12)(q1), circ[-1])
    noisy_twirled_circuits.append(split_circuit)

print("Example noisy twirled circuit", noisy_twirled_circuits[-1], sep="\n")
```

> The twirled PTM is averaged over each noisy twirled circuit such that the new PTM is close to that of the PTM of incoherent noise. We skip the step in this section as we require a very large number of twirled circuits to demonstrate the desired effect of averaging over multiple numpy arrays.

Reviewer 2: A bit anti-climatic, I was looking forward to seeing the effect of this on those PTM heatmaps :)

Author: Yes, well, this increases the notebook execution time by a lot. The coherent noise that I used is obviously not included in the noisy options allowed by `generate_pauli_twirl_variants`. We should create an issue to clean this portion of pauli twirling. 

So, if I want to generate 100 pauli twirled circuits, I have to splice each of the circuits to make sure the noise is inserted in the correct spot and the pauli twirling gates are also inserted accordingly. Then, the next step is to get their PTM's and sum them up.

Reviewer: What if we included an image saying "this is what would happen if you generated the twirled PTM"?

Author: I have added 3 examples. 

Ideally, I would prefer this to be a gif to show how the heatmap changes when as the number of pauli twirled circuits is increased. We could keep this as a unitary hackathon issue, if there's not a lot of non-quantum issues.

## Noisy ZNE

> Lets define a larger circuit of CNOT, CZ and H gates. 

Reviewer 2: typo: Let's

also, the ghz circuit below doesn't have CZ.

```{code-cell} ipython3

from mitiq.benchmarks import generate_ghz_circuit

circuit = generate_ghz_circuit(n_qubits=7)

print(circuit)

```

We are going to add coherent noise to this circuit and then get the error-mitigated expectation value. For a detailed discussion on this, refer to the [ZNE user guide](../guide/zne-1-intro.md). 

> As we are using a simulator, we have to make sure the noise model adds coherent noise to CZ/CNOT gates in our circuit. For this, `get_noise_model` is used to add noise to CZ/CNOT gates. See [PT user guide](../guide/pt-1-intro.md) for more. 

Reviewer 2: solid function that `get_noise_model` 📦 😃

                ).freeze())
        return op

    return GateSubstitutionNoiseModel(noisy_c_gate)

def execute(circuit: Circuit, noise_level: float):
    """Returns Tr[ρ |0⟩⟨0|] where ρ is the state prepared by the circuit."""
    return (
        DensityMatrixSimulator(noise=get_noise_model(noise_level=noise_level))
        .simulate(circuit)
        .final_density_matrix[0, 0]
        .real
    )

# Set the intensity of the noise
NOISE_LEVEL = 0.2

# Compute the expectation value of the |0><0| observable
# in both the noiseless and the noisy setup
ideal_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)
noisy_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)

NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 300
twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)

# Average results executed over twirled circuits
from functools import partial
from mitiq import Executor
pt_vals = Executor(partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)).evaluate(twirled_circuits)
twirled_result = np.average(pt_vals)

print(f"Error without twirling: {abs(ideal_value - noisy_value) :.3}")
print(f"Error with twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")

> ```

Reviewer: Sometimes the error with twirling is worse than the error without. This isn't unexpected, but I think deserves a comment. I worry someone might see that and think it's a problem.

Reviewer 2: 👍 Motivating this was my main blocker when I was writing this tutorial.

## Combining Pauli Twirling with ZNE

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.zne import execute_with_zne

executor=partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)
zne_pt_vals = []

for i in twirled_circuits:
    zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(i, executor))

mitigated_result = np.average(zne_pt_vals)

print(f"Error without twirling: {abs(ideal_value - noisy_value) :.3}")

> print(f"Error with ideal and twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")
> print(f"Error with ideal and ZNE + PT: {abs(ideal_value - mitigated_result) :.3}")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
print(f"Error with twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")
print(f"Error with ZNE + PT: {abs(ideal_value - mitigated_result) :.3}")
```

The noise channel can be described using Pauli operators which makes it easy to analyze and simulate. Worst case error rate is directly proportional to the **average gate infidelity**. 

For example, a depolarizing noise channel is a stochastic noise channel where a noiseless process is probabilistically mixed with orthogonal errors. If $\rho$ is a single qubit state, $p$ is the probabilistic error rate and $\mathcal{E}(\rho)$ is the noise channel:

```{math}
\mathcal{E}(\rho) = (1-p) \rho + p \frac{I}{2}
```
$\frac{I}{2}$ is the maximally mixed state which can be described using Paulis. 

```{math}
\frac{I}{2} = \frac{1}{4} (\rho + X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)
```

Thus, the depolarizing channel can be redescribed using Paulis as shown below. 

```{math}
\mathcal{E}(\rho) = (1-\frac{3p}{4}) \rho + \frac{p}{4} (X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)

```

### Pauli Transfer Matrix

Let $\Lambda(\rho)$ be a $n$-qubit noise channel with $K_i$ being the corresponding Kraus operators.

```{math}

\Lambda(\rho) = \sum_{i=1} K_i \rho {K_i}^\dagger
```
If $P_i$ and $P_j$ are $n$-qubit Paulis, the following expression defines the entries of a Pauli Transfer Matrix (PTM). Here, 

> $i$ defines the rows while $j$ defines the columns of the PTM. All entries of the PTM are real and in the interval $[-1, 1]$.

Reviewer: Not totally IMO. Part of the reason I mention it though, is because when you say "If $P_i$ and $P_j$ are Paulis,..." it seems like they can be any Paulis, but in reality they are specific ones, according to an ordering.

As long as that is cleared up somehow, I'm fine.

> $i$ defines the rows while $j$ defines the columns of the PTM. All entries of the PTM are real and in the interval $[-1, 1]$.

Author: I am still a bit confused about what you wanted me to add. Here are the newer changes:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a42c9b52-a8e2-43cf-b62c-05a1a72d8bd1)

    ptm_matrix = np.zeros([4**num_qubits, 4**num_qubits], dtype=complex)

    for i in range(len(vec_pauli)):
        superop_on_pauli_vec = np.matmul(superop, vec_pauli[i])
        superop_on_pauli_matrix_transpose = vector_to_matrix(
            superop_on_pauli_vec
        )
        superop_on_pauli_matrix = np.transpose(
            superop_on_pauli_matrix_transpose
        )

        # ptm_matrix_row = []
        for j in range(len(n_qubit_paulis1)):
            pauli_superop_pauli = np.matmul(
                n_qubit_paulis1[j], superop_on_pauli_matrix
            )
            ptm_matrix[j, i] = (0.5**num_qubits) * np.trace(
                pauli_superop_pauli
            )

    return ptm_matrix
```

Let us consider a simple circuit of a CNOT gate. We are going to subject this circuit to two types of noise and compare
their respective PTMs.

```{code-cell} ipython3
import numpy as np
import seaborn as sns
import matplotlib.pylab as plt

from cirq import LineQubit, Circuit, CNOT, Ry, depolarize, X, Y, Z

q0 = LineQubit(0)
q1 = LineQubit(1)

circuit = Circuit(CNOT(q0, q1))
print(circuit)
```
```{code-cell} ipython3
ptmcnot = ptm_matrix(circuit, 2)

> ax = sns.heatmap(ptmcnot.real, linewidth=0.5)

Reviewer: Currently the heatmap bounds are changing for each plot, making it difficult to compare plots against each other. Can you set the bounds for all heatmaps?

    pt_vals = Executor(partial(execute, noise_level=strength)).evaluate(twirled_circuits)
    twirled_result = np.average(pt_vals)
    twirled_noisy_diff = abs(ideal_value-twirled_result)
    error_with_twirling.append(twirled_noisy_diff)

    executor=partial(execute, noise_level=strength)
    zne_vals.append(abs(ideal_value - execute_with_zne(circuit, executor)))
    
    zne_pt_vals = []
    for i in twirled_circuits:
        zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(i, executor))
    mitigated_twirled_result = np.average(zne_pt_vals)
    error_with_twirling_and_zne.append(abs(ideal_value - mitigated_twirled_result))

plt.plot(noise_strength, error_no_zne_no_twirling,"", label=r"|Ideal - Noisy|", color="#1f77b4")
plt.plot(noise_strength, zne_vals, "", label=r"|Ideal - ZNE|", color="#bcbd22")
plt.plot(noise_strength, error_with_twirling,"", label=r"|Ideal - Twirling|", color="#ff7f0e")
plt.plot(noise_strength, error_with_twirling_and_zne, "", label=r"|Ideal - (ZNE + Twirling)|", color="#2ca02c")

plt.xlabel(r"Noise strength, Coherent noise:$R_y(\frac{\pi}{2} \times \text{noise_strength})$")

> plt.ylabel("Expectation Values Difference")

Reviewer: Can we relabel this to "Absolute Error"?

plt.title("Comparison of expectation values with ideal as a function of noise strength")
plt.legend()

> plt.show()

Reviewer: Do we understand why ZNE is so good when the noise strength = 0.5?

Author: I am not too sure for the circuit used in this example. 

If I use a smaller GHZ circuit of 2 qubits, the noise does not do anything as the final state vector before and after adding coherent noise is the same. Interestingly, this behavior is not preserved as the number of qubits in the initial ghz circuit is increased. Worth looking into!

If $\rho$ is a single qubit state, $p$ is the probabilistic error rate and $\mathcal{E}(\rho)$ is the noise channel:

$$
\mathcal{E}(\rho) = (1-p) \rho + p \frac{I}{2}
$$ (depolarizing_noise)

$\frac{I}{2}$ is the maximally mixed state which can be described using Paulis.

$$
\frac{I}{2} = \frac{1}{4} (\rho + X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)
$$

Thus, the depolarizing channel can be redescribed using Paulis as shown below. 

$$
\mathcal{E}(\rho) = (1-\frac{3p}{4}) \rho + \frac{p}{4} (X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)

$$(depolarizing_noise_paulis)

### Pauli Transfer Matrix (PTM)

Let $\Lambda(\rho)$ be a $n$-qubit noise channel with $K_i$ being the corresponding Kraus operators. For a Pauli channel,
we can use $P_i$ and $P_j$ to be the Kraus operators in Eq.{math:numref}`CPTP_map`.

$$
\Lambda(\rho) = \sum_{i=1} K_i \rho {K_i}^\dagger 

> $$(CPTP_map)

Author: I am going to ignore this suggestion as Alessandro had pointed out the CPTP map expression was disjointed and not discussed anywhere. In the context of Pauli noise channel, the kraus operators are n-qubit Paulis.

> $$(CPTP_map)

Reviewer: Does that mean you're removing this equation?

> $$(CPTP_map)

Author: No, changed my mind. I kept your suggestion and edited the `Pauli operators` to n-qubit Paulis as a segue to the next line about their definition.

The known fault tolerant thresholds for stochastic noise are higher than coherent noise which makes the former a 'preferable' type of noise compared to the latter. To avoid dealing with coherent noise, Pauli twirling can be used to tailor coherent noise to incoherent noise. Same as Eq {math:numref}`depolarizing_noise_paulis`, when a coherent noise channel is Pauli twirled, the noise channel can be described using Paulis after averaging over multiple Pauli twirled circuits. Refer to the [Pauli Twirling user guide](../guide/pt.md) for additional information. 

> It is worth noting that the number of Pauli twirled circuits required to transform coherent noise to incoherent noise differs
> across the circuit used, noise stength, etc. The higher the number of generated twirled circuits, the better the result. Similarly, we get better results from Pauli twirling when the coherent noise strength is closer to the small error limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is worth noting that the number of Pauli twirled circuits required to transform coherent noise to incoherent noise depends on the circuit used, noise stength, etc.
Generally, the higher the number of generated twirled circuits, the better the result.
Similarly, better results are obtained more quickly when the coherent noise strength is low.
```

ax.set_title('Ideal CNOT PTM')
plt.show()
```
```{code-cell} ipython3
# PTM of a noisy CNOT gate: depolarizing noise
noisy_circuit_incoherent = circuit.with_noise(depolarize(p=0.3))
print(noisy_circuit_incoherent)

ptmcnot = ptm_matrix(noisy_circuit_incoherent, 2)
ax = sns.heatmap(ptmcnot.real, linewidth=0.5, vmin=-1, vmax=1, cmap="PiYG")
ax.set_title('PTM of noisy CNOT (incoherent)')
plt.show()
```
```{code-cell} ipython3
# PTM of a noisy CNOT gate: Rz
noisy_circuit_coherent = circuit.with_noise(Ry(rads=np.pi/12))
print(noisy_circuit_coherent)

ptmcnot = ptm_matrix(noisy_circuit_coherent, 2)
ax = sns.heatmap(ptmcnot.real, linewidth=0.5, vmin=-1, vmax=1, cmap="PiYG")
ax.set_title('PTM of noisy CNOT (coherent)')
plt.show()
```
If we compare the PTM of the ideal CNOT gate to those when the gate was subjected to incoherent noise and coherent noise, 
there are additional sources of errors to deal with when coherent noise is acting on the CNOT gate. These can be reduced or tailored to be close to how the incoherent noise PTM appears through Pauli Twirling.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.pt import generate_pauli_twirl_variants

> # Generate twirled circuits
> NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 3
> twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(
>     circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)
> print("Example ideal twirled circuit", twirled_circuits[-1], sep="\n")

Reviewer: ```suggestion

NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 3

twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(
    circuit,
    num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS,
)
print("Example ideal twirled circuit", twirled_circuits[-1], sep="\n")
```

```
Now, lets add coherent noise to the CNOT gate in each twirled circuit.
```{code-cell} ipython3

noisy_twirled_circuits = []

for circ in twirled_circuits:
    split_circuit = Circuit(circ[0], circ[1], Ry(rads=np.pi/12)(q0), Ry(rads=np.pi/12)(q1), circ[-1])
    noisy_twirled_circuits.append(split_circuit)

print("Example noisy twirled circuit", noisy_twirled_circuits[-1], sep="\n")
```

> The twirled PTM is averaged over each noisy twirled circuit such that the new PTM is close to that of the PTM of incoherent noise. We skip the step in this section as we require a very large number of twirled circuits to demonstrate the desired effect of averaging over multiple numpy arrays. The variations in pauli twirled PTMs are shown below when averaged over a different number of pauli twirled circuits: [3](../img/pt_zne_3_circuits.png), [5](../img/pt_zne_5_circuits.png), [30](../img/pt_zne_30_circuits.png) and [300](../img/pt_zne_100_circuits.png).  

Author: IDK if there's a better way to provide a link to a couple of png images. These appear as images a user will have to download. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b35b2fb1-dc37-4009-856a-a8941b9744e9)

> The twirled PTM is averaged over each noisy twirled circuit such that the new PTM is close to that of the PTM of incoherent noise. We skip the step in this section as we require a very large number of twirled circuits to demonstrate the desired effect of averaging over multiple numpy arrays. The variations in pauli twirled PTMs are shown below when averaged over a different number of pauli twirled circuits: [3](../img/pt_zne_3_circuits.png), [5](../img/pt_zne_5_circuits.png), [30](../img/pt_zne_30_circuits.png) and [100](../img/pt_zne_100_circuits.png).  

Reviewer: IMO no need to have the image links given the beautiful GIF is there!

                ).freeze())
        return op

    return GateSubstitutionNoiseModel(noisy_c_gate)

def execute(circuit: Circuit, noise_level: float):
    """Returns Tr[ρ |0⟩⟨0|] where ρ is the state prepared by the circuit."""
    return (
        DensityMatrixSimulator(noise=get_noise_model(noise_level=noise_level))
        .simulate(circuit)
        .final_density_matrix[0, 0]
        .real
    )

# Set the intensity of the noise
NOISE_LEVEL = 0.2

# Compute the expectation value of the |0><0| observable
# in both the noiseless and the noisy setup
ideal_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)
noisy_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)

NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 300
twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)

# Average results executed over twirled circuits
from functools import partial
from mitiq import Executor
pt_vals = Executor(partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)).evaluate(twirled_circuits)
twirled_result = np.average(pt_vals)

print(f"Error without twirling: {abs(ideal_value - noisy_value) :.3}")
print(f"Error with twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")
```

```{caution}

> It is worth noting that Pauli twirling's goal is to tailor the noise from coherent to incoherent. Depending on the noise strength, type of coherent noise etc. this transformation might not give better results after the Pauli twirled circuit is executed. See the plot in the next section for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is worth noting that Pauli twirling's goal is to tailor the noise from coherent to incoherent.
Depending on the noise strength, type of coherent noise etc., this transformation alone might not give better results after the Pauli twirled circuit is executed.
```

Author: >  See the plot in the next section for more information.

Why remove this line?

Reviewer: I'm not sure I meant to, but can we change it to

> See the plot in the next section for an example.

```

## Combining Pauli Twirling with ZNE

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.zne import execute_with_zne

executor=partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)
zne_pt_vals = []

> for i in twirled_circuits:
>     zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(i, executor))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for twirled_circuit in twirled_circuits:
    zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(twirled_circuit, executor))
```

plt.plot(noise_strength, zne_vals, "", label=r"|Ideal - ZNE|", color="#bcbd22")
plt.plot(noise_strength, error_with_twirling,"", label=r"|Ideal - Twirling|", color="#ff7f0e")
plt.plot(noise_strength, error_with_twirling_and_zne, "", label=r"|Ideal - (ZNE + Twirling)|", color="#2ca02c")

plt.xlabel(r"Noise strength, Coherent noise:$R_y(\frac{\pi}{2} \times \text{noise_strength})$")
plt.ylabel("Absolute Error")
plt.title("Comparison of expectation values with ideal as a function of noise strength")
plt.legend()
plt.show()
```

As we are plotting the difference between the ideal expectation value and the noisy, error-mitigated and/or noise-tailored
expectation values, the closer the curve is to `0.0` on the Y-axis, the technique provides an advantage.

```{warning}
You can get better results if you control the number of samples in `noise_strength` in addition to using a higher number for
`NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS`. We have chosen to not do so to reduce execution time for this tutorial.
```

## Conclusion

In this tutorial, we've shown how to use a noise tailoring method with Zero-Noise Extrapolation.

> If you're interested in finding out more about these techniques, check out their respective sections of the users guide: [ZNE](../guide/zne.md), [Pauli Twilring](../guide/pt.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're interested in finding out more about these techniques, check out their respective sections of the users guide: [ZNE](../guide/zne.md), [Pauli Twirling](../guide/pt.md).

```

For example, a depolarizing noise channel is a stochastic noise channel where a noiseless process is probabilistically mixed with orthogonal errors. Pauli twirling strives to convert some noise channel into a Pauli noise channel or approximately close to a Pauli noise channel. This conversion is determined by the depth of the circuit, coherent noise strength and the total number of Pauli twirled circuits used. As shown in Eq.{math:numref}`depolarizing_noise` and {math:numref}`depolarizing_noise_Paulis`, a local depolarizing noise channel can be described using Paulis i.e. it can be said that Pauli twirling tailors a noise channel into a local depolarizing noise channel {cite}`Garc_a_Mart_n_2024`.  

If $\rho$ is a single qubit state, $p$ is the probabilistic error rate and $\mathcal{E}(\rho)$ is the noise channel:

$$
\mathcal{E}(\rho) = (1-p) \rho + p \frac{I}{2}
$$ (depolarizing_noise)

$\frac{I}{2}$ is the maximally mixed state which can be described using Paulis.

$$
\frac{I}{2} = \frac{1}{4} (\rho + X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)
$$

Thus, the depolarizing channel can be redescribed using Paulis as shown below. 

$$

> \mathcal{E}(\rho) = (1-\frac{3p}{4}) \rho + \frac{p}{4} (X \rho X + Y \rho Y + Z \rho Z)

Author: I think there was an earlier conversation in this PR where either you or Nate suggested providing more details on why coherent noise scales quadratically. 

Which is why I decided to add some information about $r(\mathcal{E})$ and the relationship to average gate infidelity.

                ).freeze())
        return op

    return GateSubstitutionNoiseModel(noisy_c_gate)

def execute(circuit: Circuit, noise_level: float):
    """Returns Tr[ρ |0⟩⟨0|] where ρ is the state prepared by the circuit."""
    return (
        DensityMatrixSimulator(noise=get_noise_model(noise_level=noise_level))
        .simulate(circuit)
        .final_density_matrix[0, 0]
        .real
    )

# Set the intensity of the noise
NOISE_LEVEL = 0.2

# Compute the expectation value of the |0><0| observable
# in both the noiseless and the noisy setup
ideal_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)
noisy_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)

NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 300
twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)

# Average results executed over twirled circuits
from functools import partial
from mitiq import Executor
pt_vals = Executor(partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)).evaluate(twirled_circuits)
twirled_result = np.average(pt_vals)

print(f"Error without twirling: {abs(ideal_value - noisy_value) :.3}")
print(f"Error with twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")
```

> ```{caution}

Author: This code block is only demonstrating how to get an execute the circuit in addition to utilizing Pauli twirling. 

> then warning the reader that they shouldn't pay attention to them is odd.

Due to the values I used, we are making a point to state that there are cases when Pauli twirling on its own is not too helpful.

> ```{caution}

Reviewer 2: Maybe you can make the same point in a more gentle way for the reader, as opposed to using the «caution» box.

```

## Combining Pauli Twirling with ZNE

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.zne import execute_with_zne

executor=partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)
zne_pt_vals = []

for twirled_circuit in twirled_circuits:
    zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(twirled_circuit, executor))

mitigated_result = np.average(zne_pt_vals)

print(f"Error without twirling: {abs(ideal_value - noisy_value) :.3}")
print(f"Error with twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")
print(f"Error with ZNE + PT: {abs(ideal_value - mitigated_result) :.3}")

```
Accordingly, depending on the noise strength, a combination of PT and ZNE do not work that well compared to just PT or ZNE. Thus, it is important to understand when combining a noisy tailoring technique with an error mitigation technique provides a significant advantage. 

```{code-cell} ipython3

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# Plot error vs noise strength
noise_strength = np.linspace(0.0, 1.0, 50)
error_no_zne_no_twirling = []
error_with_twirling = []
error_with_twirling_and_zne = []
zne_vals = []
ideal_values = []
NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 30

for strength in noise_strength:
    ideal_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)

>     ideal_values.append(ideal_value)

Reviewer 2: These go outside the for loop

Author: Not really. These lines are making sure the size of `ideal_values` is the same as the size of the other values we are comparing it to.

Author: Never mind. I changed this.

    noisy_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=strength)
    id_noisy_diff = abs(ideal_value-noisy_value)
    error_no_zne_no_twirling.append(id_noisy_diff)

    twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)
    pt_vals = Executor(partial(execute, noise_level=strength)).evaluate(twirled_circuits)
    twirled_result = np.average(pt_vals)
    twirled_noisy_diff = abs(ideal_value-twirled_result)
    error_with_twirling.append(twirled_noisy_diff)

    executor=partial(execute, noise_level=strength)
    zne_vals.append(abs(ideal_value - execute_with_zne(circuit, executor)))
    
    zne_pt_vals = []
    for i in twirled_circuits:
        zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(i, executor))

>     mitigated_twirled_result = np.average(zne_pt_vals)

Reviewer 2: This is basically the same code as in the previous section. Since it's the core part of the tutorial, at least when it comes to code, it should be in a function on its own.

Author: I don't really get what you are trying to suggest here. Do you want me to create a function that compares the expectation values?

Reviewer 2: What I am suggesting here is that you could define a routine to encapsulate the code for ZNE + PT. Something on the lines of:
```python
def zne_with_pt(circuit, executor, num_twirled_variants):
    zne_pt_vals = []
    for twirled_circuit in generate_pauli_twirl_variants(circuit, num_circuits=num_twirled_variants):
        zne_pt_vals.append(execute_with_zne(twirled_circuit, executor))
    return np.average(zne_pt_vals)
```
And you can use it both in L379 and L333. This would highlight the steps that are involved in composing the two techniques.

Author: Ah, ok. I get what you are trying to say now. 

Previously, I thought you wanted me to define a function to make it easy to get all the expectation values in the `for` loop before the plot.

    error_with_twirling_and_zne.append(abs(ideal_value - mitigated_twirled_result))

plt.plot(noise_strength, error_no_zne_no_twirling,"", label=r"|Ideal - Noisy|", color="#1f77b4")
plt.plot(noise_strength, zne_vals, "", label=r"|Ideal - ZNE|", color="#bcbd22")
plt.plot(noise_strength, error_with_twirling,"", label=r"|Ideal - Twirling|", color="#ff7f0e")
plt.plot(noise_strength, error_with_twirling_and_zne, "", label=r"|Ideal - (ZNE + Twirling)|", color="#2ca02c")

> plt.xlabel(r"Noise strength, Coherent noise:$R_y(\frac{\pi}{2} \times \text{noise_strength})$")

Reviewer 2: nit: «Noise strength» as label vs. noise_strength as variable. Use the same, so it's clear that it's the actual values in the axis that parametrize the noise operation.

# in both the noiseless and the noisy setup
ideal_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=0.0)
noisy_value = execute(circuit, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)

NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS = 300
twirled_circuits = generate_pauli_twirl_variants(circuit, num_circuits=NUM_TWIRLED_VARIANTS)

# Average results executed over twirled circuits
from functools import partial
from mitiq import Executor
pt_vals = Executor(partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)).evaluate(twirled_circuits)
twirled_result = np.average(pt_vals)

print(f"Error without twirling: {abs(ideal_value - noisy_value) :.3}")
print(f"Error with twirling: {abs(ideal_value - twirled_result) :.3}")
```

It is worth noting that Pauli twirling's goal is to only tailor the noise from coherent to incoherent. 

Depending on the noise strength, type of coherent noise etc. this transformation might not give better results after the Pauli twirled circuit is executed. See the plot in the [next section](#combining-pauli-twirling-with-zne) for an example.

## Combining Pauli Twirling with ZNE

```{code-cell} ipython3
from mitiq.zne import execute_with_zne
from typing import List

executor=partial(execute, noise_level=NOISE_LEVEL)

> def combine_zne_pt(list_circuits, executor) -> List[float]:

Reviewer 2: 🎉
